# Privacy Policy

This document describes what data may be sent over the internet when you use the Dolphin app. The Dolphin websites are not covered by this document.

By "the Dolphin app", we mean the emulator that's available to download from the following locations:

- https://dolphin-emu.org/download/
- https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=org.dolphinemu.dolphinemu
- https://github.com/dolphin-emu/dolphin

If you download Dolphin from somewhere else, we can't guarantee that you're using the same app, or that the app you're using complies with this privacy policy.

We generally don't collect any personal data when you use the Dolphin app. The complete details about what data we collect are available below.

Please note that some of the Dolphin features mentioned in this document aren't available on all platforms.

## Usage Statistics Reporting

Usage Statistics Reporting is an optional system in Dolphin that lets us find out about what conditions Dolphin is being used in. This data helps us make decisions when developing Dolphin. No data will be sent unless you say yes to enabling Usage Statistics Reporting. If you say yes, you can revoke your consent or reset your anonymous identifiers at any time in Dolphin's settings.

We aim to not collect any personal data with Usage Statistics Reporting. In particular, we don't store your IP address.

We collect anonymous identifiers so that we can avoid counting data from the same user more than once. These anonymous identifiers are generated by Dolphin and aren't shared with other apps.

The following data is collected along with an anonymous identifier:

- Which version of Dolphin you're using
- Which operating system you're using, including its version
- What hardware you're using

The following data is collected along with an anonymous identifier that's unique for each game and isn't the same as the usual anonymous identifier (to make it difficult for us to track who is running which game):

- Which game you're running
- Your Dolphin settings
- Which type of controller you're using
- Which features are supported by your GPU
- Which features of the emulated console are used by the running game
- How fast Dolphin is running

## NetPlay

When using NetPlay, the following data will be sent over an unencrypted connection to everyone who's in the same NetPlay session as you:

- Your Dolphin version
- Your operating system (but not its exact version)
- The selected game
- Your selected nickname
- Any chat messages you type

Additionally, if you are the host of a session and you enable synchronizing save data or any other data, that data will be sent to everyone who's in the the NetPlay session.

You can change your nickname at any time, except while in a NetPlay session. Your selected nickname is stored on your device.

Because NetPlay sets up peer-to-peer connections to the people you play with, it's possible for them to discover your IP address if they analyze the network traffic.

### Traversal Server

If you're using Dolphin's default traversal server, your IP address and port may be temporarily stored in the working memory of a server operated by us for the purpose of setting up connections to other players, but it won't be durably stored. If you've configured Dolphin to use a different traversal server, the operator of that server may have a different privacy policy.

### Index Server

If the host of a session enables the "Show in server browser" option, the following data about the session will be sent to a server and forwarded to users who are viewing the NetPlay session browser:

- The Dolphin version
- The selected region for the session
- The selected name for the session
- The selected game
- Whether the game is currently running
- Whether a password is required for joining
- The number of connected users
- The necessary information for establishing an IP connection to the host

If you're using Dolphin's default NetPlay index server, the data will be stored temporarily in the working memory of the server but won't be durably stored. If you've configured Dolphin to use a different NetPlay index server, the operator of that server may have a different privacy policy.

## Online System Updates

Dolphin lets you perform an online system update in the same way as on a real Wii console. If you do this, a request will be sent to a system update server. The system update server sends a response containing links to system files to download, and Dolphin downloads those files.

The request sent to the system update server contains the following data:

- Your console ID (if you haven't imported a NAND dump from a real console, this will be the same console ID as for all other Dolphin users that haven't imported a NAND dump)
- Your console region

By default, the system update server is a server ran by us that responds with links to files hosted by Nintendo. Our server discards the data in the request after the request has been processed. If you've configured Dolphin to use a different system update server ("WiiNusShopUrl"), the operator of that server may have a different privacy policy.

## Dolphin Updates

On some platforms, Dolphin can automatically check for and install updates to itself. If you use this feature, Dolphin will send requests to a server ran by us, containing the following data:

- Your platform (operating system)
- Your current Dolphin version
- Your selected update track

Our server discards this data after the request has been processed.

## GameTDB

If the setting "Download Game Covers from GameTDB.com" or "Download Game Covers from GameTDB.com for Use in Grid Mode" is enabled in Dolphin, Dolphin may send requests to GameTDB.com to download cover art for the games you put in Dolphin's game list. These requests may specify which games you have and your language settings. The privacy policy for GameTDB.com is available at: https://www.gametdb.com/Main/Legal

## Redump.org

If you press the "Verify Integrity" button in Dolphin with the "Redump.org Status" option enabled, Dolphin may send a request to Redump.org to download a list of known discs. This request specifies which console the selected game is for, but doesn't specify the exact game. Please note that the connection isn't encrypted. For more information about the website, please visit: http://redump.org/

## Downloading Gecko Codes

If you press the "Download Gecko Codes" or "Download Codes" button in Dolphin, Dolphin will send a request to codes.rc24.xyz, a mirror of the now defunct website www.geckocodes.org. The request specifies which game you want to download codes for. Please note that if you're using Dolphin on Android, the connection isn't encrypted. For more information about the website, please visit: https://codes.rc24.xyz/

## Games with Online Services

Some software that you can run in Dolphin provides online services. These online services are covered by separate privacy policies. The software you're running will normally let you know about the relevant privacy policies, unless you've imported data from a Wii or Wii U console where you've already accepted the privacy policies.

<!-- Software that uses Nintendo WFC requires you to accept Nintendo's terms in the Wii Menu unless you've already done so. Services that use separate privacy policies, such as YouTube and Netflix, generally let you know about the policies when signing up. Not that these services really function anymore as of 2022... -->